[Music]
sixteen post-war developments when the
Philippines were ceded to the United
States revolutionary forces within the
islands anticipated independence for
their country when they learned that
they had merely exchanged colonial
overseers agitation and insurrection
became their tactic of reprisal among
those leading these assaults was emilio
aguinaldo an insurrectionist of
longstanding whom the united states
enlisted in the war against spain only
to have him become a foe when peace gave
america control of the philippines by
1901 Nagin Aldo was an intelligence
interest his pursuer was Frederick
Funston an agent of the military
information division Funston had served
with the cuban revolutionary forces was
caught by the spanish authorities and
obtained release from prison through the
intervention of american diplomats upon
returning to the United States he was
debriefed by Colonel Arthur Wagner head
of the military information division
recognized his keen eye and remembered
his abilities when difficulties arose
with Aguinaldo having served in the
islands during the spanish-american war
Funston was stationed at San Ysidro on
Luzon when in February 1901 he received
word of the capture of a band of
insurrectos one of whom was a courier
from Aguinaldo with cipher messages for
other insurrectionist leaders it also
appeared that again Aldo himself was
encamped in the northern area of Liu's
own perhaps in the friendly village of
Pelin on quote funston's mind went into
action he knew it would be impossible to
take AG and Aldo by conventional
military methods any movement of that
kind would be telegraphed far ahead by
means only the keen-eyed Tagalog
guerrillas knew he studied the map
paladin lay inland from the east coast
at the northern end of Luzon a plan
began to form in his head a chosen band
of Filipinos loyal to the United States
and led only by a cadre of Americans who
would have to be disguised somehow might
be taken by sea to the north
then disembarked at night for quick
penetration of the hinterland by one
ruse or another Agha naldo's stronghold
would have to be breached without a
fight or the slippery rebel chief would
disappear into nothingness as he had so
often done before end quote
Funston recruited approximately a
hundred Maccabee bees as revolutionaries
and explained the presence of Americans
with them as being captives their cause
and case was strengthened by the
addition of some forged communicates and
linguistic cramming on the part of the
Maccabee bees to learn the Tagalog
dialect authenticity was added to the
band with appropriate uniforms and
weapons the gunboat Vicksburg landed the
group on the northern coast and a
grueling march inland was begun after
much suffering the party came in contact
with one of Agra naldo's forward
observers the MacCabe bees were taken
into the enemy camp while the American
captives were held a short distance away
at the proper moment the Maccabees
seized the rebels the Americans rushed
in and Aguinaldo was captured quote word
of the American success spread across
wild northern Luzon with the rapidity
that always has astounded those
accustomed only to the electric marvels
of civilization Funston turned his force
about prepared for the worst
he knew that if the trip inland had been
rough the return could be all but
impossible if the country remained
hostile to his immeasurable relief it
did not and when aldo in captivity
seemed to paralyze the people the trip
to the coast was made almost without
incident and thence by ship to Manila
the back of the insurrection was broken
end quote
it was also in 1901 in the Philippines
that another intelligence actor captain
Ralph H Van Diemen made his appearance a
graduate of West Point and once an army
surgeon Van Diemen championed the
fledgling military information division
and urged his military superiors to give
more consideration to intelligence
development in the Philippines he came
to the attention of General Arthur
MacArthur who asked him to organize a
Philippines military Information Bureau
although patterned after the Adjutant
General's unit Van Diemen's office had
no official connection with Washington
namesake there was also one major
operational difference between the two
organizations and 'man utilized
undercover operatives
all Filipinos except for one American
subsequently the Philippines military
information bureau would uncover a plot
to assassinate General MacArthur
apprised the army of Japanese interests
and intelligence activity in the
Philippines and make clandestine
observations in China during the Boxer
Rebellion in 1903 after the General
Staff system was introduced in the Army
and the intelligence organization became
the second division g2 of the General
Staff the Philippines military
Information Bureau was given branch
status to the new Intelligence Division
Van Diemen returned from Asian duty in
1915 and would assume a major leadership
role in intelligence activities as
America prepared for World War when the
General Staff of the army was created by
Congress in 1903 the military
information division of the Adjutant
General's Office became the second
division of the new entity footnote
generally on the general staff concept
CJD Hittle the military staff its
history and development harrisburg the
military service publishing company 1949
otto L Nelson jr. national security and
the general staff Washington Infantry
Journal press 1946 Raphael P thean
legislative history of the General Staff
of the army of the United States
Washington United States government
at office 1901 and footnote this change
in status generally pleased intelligence
advocates within the army however
general Franklin Bell a man with whom
Van Diemen had publicly disagreed over
intelligence matters in the Philippines
and an officer not favorably disposed
toward the intelligence function became
chief of staff when the head of the Army
War College g3 suggested that the
Intelligence Division be physically
housed with the War College
to facilitate use of common resources
Bell approved the proposal as being
practical shortly thereafter the War
College sought to absorb the
intelligence unit this action Bell also
approved but perhaps not merely for
reasons of practicality alone
transferred to the War College in 1908
the intelligence function was
administered by an information committee
from 1910 until the dawn of World War
one a panel described by one Authority
as quote personnel with no knowledge of
the intelligence units aims and
functions and no interest in learning
them end quote
the military were not unaware of
possible intelligence penetration by
foreign powers and of the necessity of
protecting defense facilities and
information from such scrutiny new
regulations in 1908 on this matter said
quote commanding officers of posts at
which are located lake or coastal
defenses are charged with the
responsibility of preventing as far as
practicable visitors from obtaining
information relative to such defenses
which would probably be communicated to
a foreign power and to this end may
prescribe and enforce appropriate
regulations governing visitors to their
posts American citizens whose loyalty to
their government is unquestioned may be
permitted to visit such portions of the
defenses as the commanding officer deems
proper the taking of photographic or
other views of permanent works of
Defence will not be permitted
neither written nor pictorial
descriptions of these works will be made
for publication without the authority of
the Secretary of War nor will any
information be given concerning them
which is not contained in the printed
reports and documents of the War
Department end quote
it is thought that this language
constitutes the first open admission by
the War Department of an effort to
protect fixed defenses and information
pertaining to same against foreign
intelligence penetration at
approximately the same point in time as
this security directive was issued
efforts said establishing the
government's first general investigative
organization came to fruition resulting
in a force generally designed to probe
crimes against the federal establishment
and to pursue those alleged to have
committed such offences inherent in this
investigative mission was an
intelligence function the systematic
gathering and interpretation of
information with a view to Crime Control
and Prevention a point of contention and
debate within this mission as will be
seen is whether the crimes in question
are solely those which are prosecutable
or whether other potential or actual
offenses not stated in law may be
included in the understanding
while the Attorney General was one of
the original cabinet officers of 1789 a
Department of Justice did not exist
until June 1870 the following year
Congress provided the new agency with
$50,000 for the quote detection and
prosecution of crimes against the United
States end quote
however because attorney general Amos J
Ackerman had only one special agent for
detection work he utilized the
appropriation by employing private
detectives borrowing Secret Service
agents or otherwise burdening United
States Attorney's and marshals with
investigative tasks in 1875 Attorney
General George H Williams appointed for
regional special detectives and
occasionally hired private detectives
when the United States Attorney's had
need of such services for specific
duties a few examiner's were added to
the Justice Department's forces in 1878
these personnel scrutinized the records
of court clerk's marshals commissioners
and district attorneys but because their
appointments soon became embroiled in
patronage they rendered what has been
described as dis sultry service during
his tenure of office Attorney General
Benjamin H Brewster 1881 through 1884
declared he was personally opposed to
utilizing private detectives for
department investigate ory work but
while he said he wanted to dispose of
such operatives as soon as possible he
was forced to rely on some private
assistance and chose the Pinkerton
agency after the homestead Massacre
tarnished the Pinkerton name Congress in
indignation over the incident forbid the
further utilization of these agents and
effectively ended the use of private
detectives by the federal government
footnote on July 6th 1892 strikers at
the Carnegie steel company plant in
Homestead Pennsylvania fired upon two
barges on the Monongahela River
containing some 300 Pinkerton detectives
the Pinkertons were known strike
breakers and their presence generated
hatred among the strikers
after several hours of fighting the
Pinkerton forces surrendered and were
roughly escorted out of town in the
aftermath of the encounter three guards
and ten strikers lay dead and others
suffered severe injuries some 8,000
National Guardsmen restored order in the
community and subsequently after holding
out for almost five months the strike
was given up no effective steal Union
was organized in the area until the
1930s and footnote the Justice
Department continued to rely upon the
Secret Service for investigators
after the utilization of private
detectives was halted and by 1906 as
many as 32 of these operatives had been
detailed from Treasury the arrangement
was a makeshift and rested upon
congressional sanction through the
annual appropriations process by 1907
Attorney General Charles J Bonaparte the
american-born grandson of Napoleon's
youngest brother attempted to obtain his
own investigators but Congress for
various reasons was unconvinced of their
necessity quote one factor was an over
generalized but not unwarranted contempt
for detectives and their practices many
persons who then went into such work
were recommended for it by their own
criminal records and what these had
taught them about the underworld not by
any respect for the law
- Attorney General Bonaparte the fact
that detectives tended not to be a high
type signified that justice should have
its own force of carefully chosen and
rigorously supervised din vestigators
but too many members of Congress among
them Chairman James a Tony of the House
Appropriations Committee and signified
that detectives should to the greatest
possible extent be kept out of the
federal government the other factor was
a state of tension between Congress and
the president its basic cause was the
fact that a congress still rooted in the
McKinley mark Hanna tradition of
politics had no taste for Roosevelt's
many-sided reform program or for his
trust-busting fervor Speaker Joe cannon
for
example the most powerful man in the
house broke with the president and
became one of his arch foes because of
the government's antitrust action
against Standard Oil this and other
actions of like type had cannon
contended shaken the confidence of the
business community and brought on
financial panic secondary causes of
tension were however soon added to the
primary cause in 1905
Senator John Mitchell and representative
John Williamson both of Oregon were
indicted in land fraud cases when
Roosevelt said in terms that sounded
like a blanket charge of wrongdoing that
he would order as many more
investigations of members of Congress as
seemed warranted that body went on the
defensive it was kept there by rumour
mongers some of whom were indubitably in
the pay of elements that wanted to go to
Congress into halting justices use of
Secret Service operatives end quote
not only did Congress deny Bonaparte's
request for an investigative force in
1907 it refused to comply again the
following year when a prohibition on the
detailing of Secret Service agents to
the Justice Department was also affected
faced with the prospect of having no
avenue for organizing a detection group
other than his own authority the
Attorney General with the president's
approval and at the suggestion of Henry
L Stimson who was then United States
attorney in New York hired nine Secret
Service agents who were separated from
Treasury on June 30th 1908 quote on July
1st 1908 Attorney General Bonaparte put
his 9 new detectives and such special
agents and examiner's as were already on
his payroll under the supervision of his
chief examiner Stanley W Finch and thus
gave himself a force of 23 men on July
26th acting on presidential instructions
he issued the order which made this
force a permanent subdivision of the
department with Finch as its chief and
quote reluctantly Congress accepted the
new investigative unit at first it did
not have a strong mission
scribed by existing laws soon however it
began operations pursuant to the
Constitution's interstate commerce
clause tracking down stolen federal
property and thieves transversing state
boundaries pursuing white slavers
violating the Mann Act and scrutinizing
the sources of labor unrest and
revolutionary rhetoric soon it along
with the other fledgling intelligence
institutions would be confronted with
monumental responsibilities and as war
clouds in Europe cast shadows upon
America and plunged the world into war
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you